in this video we are going to learn about the
Queue data structure in real life
A Queue is very familiar to all of us
For example when we go to a bank we need
to stand in a queue and the person who is
first in the line will be served first
This is exactly what is happening with a Queue Data
structure
We have a FIFO that is first in first
out functionality here so the person or the element who
came first will be served first and will be gone
out of the queue
So in a Queue an Element comes in at one
end and leaves from the other end
So a Queue has two ends so let us see the
implementation of a Queue
First we declare an array of size three so we
have static final int size equal to 3 and we have
int arr equal to new int of size and
this array of size three will be our queue and
it is initially empty
So as we just discussed in a queue insertion happens
at one end and deletion happens at the other end
The end where insertion happens is called the rear end and
the other end were deletion
Happens is called the front end
So here we need two variables Front and Rear to
represent two ends of the queue
And since the queue is empty both rear and front
are the same now so both are initialised to 0 so
int front equal to zero and int rear equal
to zero
First let us see how to insert an element into
the queue and this operation is called enqueue
So we have the function enqueue here for insertion
into the queue and we will pass the value to
be inserted into this function
So we have public void enqueue of int val
Now let us insert the element 10 in into this queue
so we can call the function enqueue bypassing the
value 10 and in the function first we need to check
If the queue is full then insertion is not possible
So we have
If rear equal to size then print queue is full
But here it is not since we have rear equal
to zero and size equal to three
So the condition fails and control goes to the else
part and here
We need to insert the element 10
So we need to add the value at the rear
and so write array of rear equal to val so the
element is inserted
Now we need to implement rear so that the next
element will be inserted here
So write rear plus plus So rear will be moved one
position right and becomes one now let us insert another
element 20 so we can call the function enqueue
With Val equal to 20 1st
We need to check if Queue is full but it
is not since rear equal to one and size equal
to three
So we go to the else part and 20 is
added at the rear
And now we need to implement rear
So rear becomes two now let us insert 30 into this queue
So again called the function check
If rear equal to size which is not so go
to else
part add 30 at rear and increment rear So rear
equal to Three now
Now let us tried to insert another element 40 so
we can call the function enqueue and in the
function
First it will check if rear equal to size which
is true here
So the queue is full so insertion is not possible
so this message will be printed and exit from the
function
So that was insertion into the queue or the
enqueue operation and we always insert element at the
rear end of the queue
Now let us see how to delete an element from
a Queue
And the deletion operation in a queue is called the
dequeue operation and we always delete an element from
the front end of the queue
So we have the function dequeue to perform deletion
from a queue so we have public void dequeue First
we need to check
If the Queue is empty then deletion is not
possible as there are no elements to delete
And when will a Queue be empty When Front and
rear are pointing the same location Then we can say
the Queue is empty
So write If front equal to rear then print Queue is
empty
But here front equal to 0 and rear equal to
three
So conditioned fails and control goes to the else part
and first let us print the value that we are
going to delete which will always be the element at
the front end of the queue
So write system dot out
dot println of dequeue
element equal to array of front Now increment front to
remove the element at front
So write front plus plus So here it makes front
equal to one and 10 will be deleted from the
queue
So the element which came first into the queue is
deleted first and that is the functionality of a Queue
Now let us perform deletion again
So we called the dequeue function and first we
check if rear equal to front
But we have rear equal three and front equal to
one
So the condition fails and we go to else part
Now here we will print the value at front which
is 20 and now Increment front which will make 20
no more a part of the queue again
Let us call dequeue and we check if queue
is empty
But we have front equal to two and rear equal to
three
So this condition fails and control goes to else
Part
And there we print 30 which is to be deleted
And then we increments front which makes front equal to 3
and 30 is now deleted from the queue
Now let us try to perform deletion again
So we called the function dequeue and it checks
a front equal to rear
And it is true since we have front equal to
three and rear equal to three so deletion is not
possible since the Queue is empty so exit from the
function
Now let us understand this more using the angry birds
so we can add birds one after the other at
the same end and from the other end we can
send the birds out
So adding birds at one end and removing them at
the other end and who came first is gone out
first
And it is a perfect first in first out data
Structure Queue.